New post: Fine-tuning Stable Diffusion Models on Intel CPUs (#1297)
huggingface/blog: stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel.md

---
title: "Fine-tuning Stable Diffusion models on Intel CPUs"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel/01.png
authors:
- user: juliensimon

> ---

Reviewer: Don't forget to update `_blog.yml` when you are done :) Also, a thumbnail needs to be added to `assets`.

Like Transformer models, you can fine-tune Diffusion models to help them generate content that matches your business needs. Initially, fine-tuning was only possible on GPU infrastructure, but things are changing! A few months ago, Intel launched the fourth generation of Xeon CPUs, code-named Sapphire Rapids. Sapphire Rapids introduces the Intel Advanced Matrix Extensions (AMX), a new hardware accelerator for deep learning workloads. We've already demonstrated the benefits of AMX in several blog posts: [fine-tuning NLP Transformers](https://huggingface.co/blog/intel-sapphire-rapids), [inference with NLP Transformers](https://huggingface.co/blog/intel-sapphire-rapids-inference), and [inference with Stable Diffusion models](https://huggingface.co/blog/intel-sapphire-rapids-inference). 

> This post will show you how to fine-tune a Stable Diffusion model on a cluster on Intel Sapphire Rapids CPUs. We will use [textual inversion](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/training/text_inversion), a technique that only requires a small number of example images. We'll use only five!

Reviewer: Perhaps we could mention that other methods such as Dreambooth are also possible, even if we don't cover them in this guide. Just mentioning it because Dreambooth is very very popular, and it supports LoRA for faster training.

```

Let's first list the IP addresses of our servers in `nodefile.` The first line refers to the primary server.

```
cat << EOF > nodefile
192.168.20.2
192.168.21.2
192.168.22.2
192.168.23.2
EOF
```

Distributed training requires password-less `ssh` between the primary and other nodes. Here's a good [article](https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/passwordless-ssh) on how to do this if you're unfamiliar with the process.

> Next, we create a new environment on each node and install the software dependencies. We notably install two Intel libraries: [oneCCL](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneCCL), to manage distributed communication and the [Intel Extension for PyTorch](https://github.com/intel/intel-extension-for-pytorch) (IPEX) to leverage the hardware acceleration features present in Sapphire Rapids. We also add `gpertools` to install `libtcmalloc,` a high-performance memory allocation library. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we create a new environment on each node and install the software dependencies. We notably install two Intel libraries: [oneCCL](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneCCL), to manage distributed communication and the [Intel Extension for PyTorch](https://github.com/intel/intel-extension-for-pytorch) (IPEX) to leverage the hardware acceleration features present in Sapphire Rapids. We also add `gperftools` to install `libtcmalloc,` a high-performance memory allocation library. 
```

```
conda create -n diffuser python==3.9
conda activate diffuser
pip3 install torch torchvision torchaudio --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu
pip3 install transformers accelerate==0.19.0
pip3 install oneccl_bind_pt -f https://developer.intel.com/ipex-whl-stable-cpu
pip3 install intel_extension_for_pytorch
conda install gperftools -c conda-forge -y
```

> Next, we clone the [diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/) repository on each node and install it from the source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we clone the [diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/) repository on each node and install it from source.
```

```
git clone https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers.git
git checkout v0.17.1
cd diffusers
pip install .
```

Next, we add IPEX to the fine-tuning script in `diffusers/examples/textual_inversion`. We import IPEX and optimize the U-Net and Variable Auto Encoder models. Please make sure this is applied to all nodes.

```
diff --git a/examples/textual_inversion/textual_inversion.py b/examples/textual_inversion/textual_inversion.py
index 4a193abc..91c2edd1 100644
--- a/examples/textual_inversion/textual_inversion.py
+++ b/examples/textual_inversion/textual_inversion.py
@@ -765,6 +765,10 @@ def main():
     unet.to(accelerator.device, dtype=weight_dtype)
     vae.to(accelerator.device, dtype=weight_dtype)

+    import intel_extension_for_pytorch as ipex
+    unet = ipex.optimize(unet, dtype=weight_dtype)
+    vae = ipex.optimize(vae, dtype=weight_dtype)
+
     # We need to recalculate our total training steps as the size of the training dataloader may have changed.
     num_update_steps_per_epoch = math.ceil(len(train_dataloader) / args.gradient_accumulation_steps)
     if overrode_max_train_steps:
```

> The last step is downloading the [training images](https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo). Ideally, we'd use a shared NFS folder, but for the sake of simplicity, we'll download the images on each node. Please ensure they're in the same directory on all nodes (`/home/devcloud/dicoo`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last step is downloading the [training images](https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo). For the sake of simplicity, we'll just download the images on each node. Please ensure they're in the same directory on all nodes (`/home/devcloud/dicoo`).
```

(It's just a few images)

Author: I see your point, but in general, NFS would be a better option :)

```
mkdir /home/devcloud/dicoo
cd /home/devcloud/dicoo
wget https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/0.jpeg
wget https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/1.jpeg
wget https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/2.jpeg
wget https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/3.jpeg
wget https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/4.jpeg
```

Here are the images:

> <img src="assets/stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel/0.jpeg" height="256">
> <img src="assets/stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel/1.jpeg" height="256">
> <img src="assets/stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel/2.jpeg" height="256">
> <img src="assets/stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel/3.jpeg" height="256">
> <img src="assets/stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel/4.jpeg" height="256">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/0.jpeg" height="256">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/1.jpeg" height="256">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/2.jpeg" height="256">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/3.jpeg" height="256">
<img src="https://huggingface.co/sd-concepts-library/dicoo/resolve/main/concept_images/4.jpeg" height="256">
```

Are they not the same? Otherwise, we usually upload images (except the thumbnail) to this repo https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/tree/main/blog to keep the blog repo lean (but I think we can just remove them in this case, and use the original URLs).

Author: good idea, why didn't I think about this?

The system setup is now complete. Let's configure the training job.

## Configuring the fine-tuning job

The [Accelerate](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/index) library makes it very easy to run distributed training. We need to run it on each node and answer simple questions.

Here's a screenshot for the primary node. On the other nodes, you need to set the rank to 1, 2, and 3. All other answers are identical.

<kbd>

>   <img src="assets/stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel/screen01.png">

Reviewer: Ideally to be moved to https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/tree/main/blog, creating a folder for this post.

</kbd>

> Finally, we need to set the environment on the primary node. It will be propagated to other nodes as the fine-tuning job starts. The first line sets the name of the network interface connected to the local network where all nodes run. You may need to adapt this: `ifconfig` will show you the appropriate information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we need to set the environment on the primary node. It will be propagated to other nodes as the fine-tuning job starts. The first line sets the name of the network interface connected to the local network where all nodes run. You may need to adapt this using`ifconfig` to get the appropriate information.
```

```

We can now launch the fine-tuning job.

## Fine-tuning the model

We launch the fine-tuning job with `mpirun`, which sets up distributed communication across the nodes listed in `nodefile`. We'll run 16 tasks (`-n`) with four tasks per node (`-ppn`). `Accelerate` automatically sets up distributed training across all tasks.

Here, we train for 3,000 steps, which should take about an hour. If you'd like a quick taste, 200 steps should run in about 5 minutes.

```
mpirun -f nodefile -n 16 -ppn 4                                                         \
accelerate launch diffusers/examples/textual_inversion/textual_inversion.py             \
--pretrained_model_name_or_path=$MODEL_NAME --train_data_dir=$DATA_DIR                  \
--learnable_property="object"   --placeholder_token="<dicoo>" --initializer_token="toy" \
--resolution=512  --train_batch_size=1  --seed=7  --gradient_accumulation_steps=1       \
--max_train_steps=3000 --learning_rate=2.0e-03 --scale_lr --lr_scheduler="constant"     \
--lr_warmup_steps=0 --output_dir=./textual_inversion_output --mixed_precision bf16      \
--save_as_full_pipeline
```

Here's a screenshot of the busy cluster:

<kbd>

>   <img src="assets/stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel/screen02.png">

Reviewer: Ideally to be moved as well.

You can quickly pinpoint the troublemaker by logging in to each node and training locally. First, set the same environment as on the primary node, then run:

```
python diffusers/examples/textual_inversion/textual_inversion.py                        \
--pretrained_model_name_or_path=$MODEL_NAME --train_data_dir=$DATA_DIR                  \
--learnable_property="object"   --placeholder_token="<dicoo>" --initializer_token="toy" \
--resolution=512  --train_batch_size=1  --seed=7  --gradient_accumulation_steps=1       \
--max_train_steps=3000 --learning_rate=2.0e-03 --scale_lr --lr_scheduler="constant"     \
--lr_warmup_steps=0 --output_dir=./textual_inversion_output --mixed_precision bf16      \
--save_as_full_pipeline
```

If training starts successfully, stop it and move to the next node. If training starts successfully on all nodes, return to the primary node and double-check the node file, the environment, and the `mpirun` command. Don't worry; you'll find the problem :)

## Generating images with the fine-tuned model

> After an hour or so of training, the model is saved locally. We could load it with a vanilla `diffusers` pipeline and predict. Instead, let's use [Optimum Intel and OpenVINO](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/intel/inference) to optimize the model. As discussed in a [previous post](https://huggingface.co/blog/intel-sapphire-rapids-inference), this lets you generate an image on a single CPU in less than 5 seconds!

Reviewer: 👍

```
pip install optimum[openvino]
```

Here, we load the model, optimize it for a static shape, and save it:

```
from optimum.intel.openvino import OVStableDiffusionPipeline

model_id = "./textual_inversion_output"

ov_pipe = OVStableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(model_id, export=True)
ov_pipe.reshape(batch_size=5, height=512, width=512, num_images_per_prompt=1)
ov_pipe.save_pretrained("./textual_inversion_output_ov")
```

Then, we load the optimized model, generate five different images and save them:

```
from optimum.intel.openvino import OVStableDiffusionPipeline

model_id = "./textual_inversion_output_ov"

ov_pipe = OVStableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(model_id, num_inference_steps=20)
prompt = ["a yellow <dicoo> robot at the beach, high quality"]*5
images = ov_pipe(prompt).images
print(images)
for idx,img in enumerate(images):
    img.save(f"image{idx}.png")
```

Here's a rather lovely example. It is impressive that the model only needed five images to learn that dicoos have glasses!

<kbd>

>   <img src="assets/stable-diffusion-finetuning-intel/dicoo_image.png">

Reviewer: Same.
